README.md, before:

# unification-sop

This is a haskell package that implements typed terms with logical variables in
a prolog-style, using [generics-sop](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/generics-sop).

Consider the datatype:

``` haskell
data Foo = FooI Int | FooS String Foo

exFoo1, exFoo2 :: Foo
exFoo1 = FooI 3
exFoo2 = FooS "hey" (FooI 4)
```

With this library you can express terms like:

``` haskell
exTermFoo1, exTermFoo2, exTermFoo3 :: Term Foo
exTermFoo1 = fooI (Var 1)                    -- prolog: fooI(X)
exTermFoo2 = fooR (Var 1) (fooI (Var 1))     -- prolog: fooR(X, fooI(Y))
exTermFoo3 = fooR (Con "hey") (fooI (Var 1)) -- prolog: fooR ("hey", fooI(X))
```

while maintaining all the well-typedness guarantees of haskell. In the example
above, `exTermFoo1` would be written in prolog as `fooI(X)`, and `exTermFoo2` as
`fooR(X, fooI(Y))`, because, since the variables are typed, `Var 1` has type
`String` in the first case and `Int` in the second.

You can find more information in the (WIP) tutorial, or see the haddock
documentation.

### A quick survey of the organization of the code:

- `Generic.Unification.Tutorial`

    Here I wrote a more complete version of the ideas expressed in the first
    section of the readme.

- `Generic.Unification.Term`

    Here I define the Term datatype, which is the structure that lets us express
    the `term with logical variable` idea.
    
- `Generic.Unification.Substitution`

    Here we define a concept of substitution, which is essentially a map from
    variables to terms; since in our case variables are typed, a substitution is
    denotationally a map `(a :: Type, var :: a) -> Term a` (using a notation
    borrowed from dependent types).
    
- `Generic.Unification.Unification`

    Here we implement the quite fast unification algorithm described in
    `Efficient functional Unification and Substitution` by A.Dijkstra (and used
    for example in his EHC haskell compiler).

- `Generic.Unification.Hinze`

    Here I wrote a complete prolog (with cut) using the machinery defined in the
    other modules, and following the paper `Prolog control constructs in a
    functional setting` by Hinze, augmented with explicit logical variables.
    This is an experimental module meant to demonstrate a possible use of the
    package, and will probably be removed in the future.

### FAQ
- Why do you want to use logical variables when you can instead use a purely
  monadic representation indicating logic computation, like the one in Hinze's
  paper?

    My tentative answer is that I sometime use logical variables to structure
    data (think graphs) so that I can use unification to quickly prototype
    algorithms.
    
- How is the `Term` datatype constructed since you use a non recursive generic
  implementation (`generics-sop` instead of, say, `generics-mrsop` or
  `multirec`)?

    I was surprised too, and the approach works by defining the `base case` of
    the recursion as special overlapping instances. I hope to detail the
    approach in a blog post sometimes.
    
### References

[Efficient functional Unification and
Substitution](http://www.cs.uu.nl/research/techreps/repo/CS-2008/2008-027.pdf)
by A. Dijkstra

[Prolog control constructs in a functional
settings](https://www.cs.ox.ac.uk/ralf.hinze/publications/Prolog.ps.gz) by R.Hinze

### Contributing

I wrote this package as a proof of concept for another one I needed (which is
closed source for now) which uses the same `Term` idea but delegates unification
to the [z3 solver](https://github.com/Z3Prover/z3). As I'm using the new package
I don't plan on improving this one much further, but if you have suggestions,
want me to develop some feature, or want to send me a patch, please open an
issue here on github: all issues are very welcome :)

Commit message:

add note on the difference with unification-fd
in particular, the fact that we can now model non-recursive datatypes.

README.md, after:

# unification-sop

This is a haskell package that implements typed terms with logical variables in
a prolog-style, using [generics-sop](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/generics-sop).

Consider the datatype:

``` haskell
data Foo = FooI Int | FooS String Foo

exFoo1, exFoo2 :: Foo
exFoo1 = FooI 3
exFoo2 = FooS "hey" (FooI 4)
```

With this library you can express terms like:

``` haskell
exTermFoo1, exTermFoo2, exTermFoo3 :: Term Foo
exTermFoo1 = fooI (Var 1)                    -- prolog: fooI(X)
exTermFoo2 = fooR (Var 1) (fooI (Var 1))     -- prolog: fooR(X, fooI(Y))
exTermFoo3 = fooR (Con "hey") (fooI (Var 1)) -- prolog: fooR ("hey", fooI(X))
```

while maintaining all the well-typedness guarantees of haskell. In the example
above, `exTermFoo1` would be written in prolog as `fooI(X)`, and `exTermFoo2` as
`fooR(X, fooI(Y))`, because, since the variables are typed, `Var 1` has type
`String` in the first case and `Int` in the second.

As an important side effect, you can also talk about unification for types that
are not structurally recursive: I see this as an important expressive
improvement on the classic `unification-fd` approach. This also opens the way
for optimizations, because if in our problems we care only about non-recursive
data types, we can omit the occurs check while maintaining soundness.

You can find more information in the (WIP) tutorial, or see the haddock
documentation.

### A quick survey of the organization of the code:

- `Generic.Unification.Tutorial`

    Here I wrote a more complete version of the ideas expressed in the first
    section of the readme.

- `Generic.Unification.Term`

    Here I define the Term datatype, which is the structure that lets us express
    the `term with logical variable` idea.
    
- `Generic.Unification.Substitution`

    Here we define a concept of substitution, which is essentially a map from
    variables to terms; since in our case variables are typed, a substitution is
    denotationally a map `(a :: Type, var :: a) -> Term a` (using a notation
    borrowed from dependent types).
    
- `Generic.Unification.Unification`

    Here we implement the quite fast unification algorithm described in
    `Efficient functional Unification and Substitution` by A.Dijkstra (and used
    for example in his EHC haskell compiler).

- `Generic.Unification.Hinze`

    Here I wrote a complete prolog (with cut) using the machinery defined in the
    other modules, and following the paper `Prolog control constructs in a
    functional setting` by Hinze, augmented with explicit logical variables.
    This is an experimental module meant to demonstrate a possible use of the
    package, and will probably be removed in the future.

### FAQ
- Why do you want to use logical variables when you can instead use a purely
  monadic representation indicating logic computation, like the one in Hinze's
  paper?

    My tentative answer is that I sometime use logical variables to structure
    data (think graphs) so that I can use unification to quickly prototype
    algorithms.
    
- How is the `Term` datatype constructed since you use a non recursive generic
  implementation (`generics-sop` instead of, say, `generics-mrsop` or
  `multirec`)?

    I was surprised too, and the approach works by defining the `base case` of
    the recursion as special overlapping instances. I hope to detail the
    approach in a blog post sometimes.
    
### References

[Efficient functional Unification and
Substitution](http://www.cs.uu.nl/research/techreps/repo/CS-2008/2008-027.pdf)
by A. Dijkstra

[Prolog control constructs in a functional
settings](https://www.cs.ox.ac.uk/ralf.hinze/publications/Prolog.ps.gz) by R.Hinze

### Contributing

I wrote this package as a proof of concept for another one I needed (which is
closed source for now) which uses the same `Term` idea but delegates unification
to the [z3 solver](https://github.com/Z3Prover/z3). As I'm using the new package
I don't plan on improving this one much further, but if you have suggestions,
want me to develop some feature, or want to send me a patch, please open an
issue here on github: all issues are very welcome :)
